In this lesson we're going to be focused on programming,
layout and template files.
The template that we're going to be focusing on is the collection.liquid template.
The reason why I decided to use this one is
because products are central to any Shopify store,
or at least should be, because essentially
an e-commerce store is set up to sell products.
Products are the most important resource in your Shopify store, most likely.
One of the ways that people can browse
through different products is through a collection.
We can see here a pretty simple loop here for the collection template,
but there is still a bit going on here.
What I want to do is simplify this and tackle this line by line.
First of all, I'm going to preview this in a new tab.
We can go to here and we can make sure we're in
a collection template by checking that collections is in the URL.
Now we have our front end,
how it looks with our template that we're editing.
The first thing I'm going to do is remove pagination
and strip this down to just a simple loop.
Pagination is handy, but I don't want to confuse you straight up,
so let's just remove it for now.
Let's see what happens when we do that.
If I refresh the page,
you'll see now every product in our store is showing on the one page.
Usually you don't want to do that because you could have
hundreds or thousands of products and that would take forever to load one page.
Pagination is very handy,
just removing it for simplicity sake.
Now to make it even simpler,
I'm going to remove that code and strip it down even further.
We just got this loop now and let's have a look at how that looks on the front end.
Refreshing the page.
You can see we now just have a list of products with a link to view them.
If I click on the first one, awesome sneakers,
I'm now on the product template looking at this product, awesome sneakers.
But we're focused on this collections loop here.
Let's break down what we got going on here.
In liquid, as I've mentioned before,
we have two types of tags.
There's actually three, and we can put in
a dash here and here and that just reduces whitespace,
it doesn't actually change the functionality at all.
I won't worry too much about that.
But essentially we just have two different types of tags,
the output tag and the logic tag.
When we just want to straight out output something to the page,
we just use the output tag.
Right now we are taking an attribute on the collection object of title.
Here you can see, this is the collections title.
Now it's a bit different with the old collection because it's an auto generated
collection by Shopify but if we go to an actual collection that I created,
featured collection, you can now see that the title of that collection is right here.
If I was to go back into my back end, change that,
it would change it here and anywhere else we reference collection.title.
Then going into a loop now,
what I'm doing is I'm taking the products attribute of the collection,
which gives me access to all the products within
that collection and I'm looping through them using
the word product as my hook in order to
access the different attributes of that particular product.
This word could be any word I wanted it to be,
but product makes sense.
It makes it more readable.
For product in collection.products,
we're going to do this for every single product.
Now, something that exists in for loops in Liquid,
which I don't know if it exists in any other language,
is you can actually have an else statement.
This is if collection.products is empty,
it won't loop through it and instead it'll output this.
The else in this instance is for when the objects that you're looping through is empty.
It's just a shorthand for if I was to put an if statement up here,
checking if the length of this was bigger than zero,
and then if not putting that out,
we can save ourselves some code and write it this way.
For every product in collection.products we're going to start
a div and inside this div we're going to have a link.
For the actual address of that link,
we're going to put in the product.url,
so the link to the actual product.
Then we have got this pipe here.
This pipe here is what defines a filter in Liquid.
We can remove this,
it's going to work pretty much just as well without that.
First of all, let's look at it with that filter.
If I go and inspect here and I look at the URL,
you can see that the URL has
featured-collection and then on the ends, products/awesome-sneakers.
But if we remove that code and hit Save,
that filter will not apply and the URL we'll get
instead is just products/awesome-sneakers.
This filter we have here within collection,
it just makes the URL of the product append to
the URL that we're currently on for
this collection instead of cutting out the collection.
That's handy for if we want to have logic on the product template and we can
reference the collection that we navigated to
because a product could be part of many different collections.
Going back to the collection page here,
the next part, very simple.
We just output the product title.
You can see that here,
we've got a link and inside it's the product title and
the a href is the link to that product.
Very simple stuff.
Let's add in the next line that we had here.
I'm going to add in all of them,
remove all of them except one,
and hit Save on that.
What we've got here is we're now outputting the price as well.
Very basic product.price and we're using another filter called money,
which formats it in a nice currency format.
If I was to remove that filter again,
you'll see it'll still work.
Let's refresh the page.
You'll get the price of all these products coming up in the pure number form.
In Shopify, the pure number form of a price includes the cents.
You can see here this is going to be 8,000 cents,
this is 11,000 cents so on, so forth.
Obviously that's not going to look that great to
the end-user so what we usually do is filter it with
the money filter and that's going to transform
that number into a much nicer formatted currency format.
Now we can see that 8,000 cents becomes $80 and we've got those decimals.
We can use other money filters to filter out the decimals if we want,
but money is the standard one.
Let's add in the next line and remove the final line.
Now we've added in an unless statement.
The unless tag is basically the opposite of the if tag.
It reads in a different way.
Unless the product is available,
we're going to do this.
We can easily transform this into an if statement,
we just have to change the condition here.
I think in this instance it makes more sense that
in terms of understanding the code to make this an if statement.
I'm going to remove the unless words and what we need to do here,
if product available is false,
or we could also do if product available is not true.
Let's just do false.
We need to do for comparison double equal signs or triple equal signs,
because a single equal sign is for assignment, not for comparison.
Remember that guys, that's quite a common basic beginner mistake.
I think this reads a lot nicer if product available is false,
as in the product is not available,
we want to show sold out,
and this will work in the exact same way.
If I go over to here,
you'll see none of these actually sold out so nothing is going to show up anyway.
But if I go back to the old collection,
I have set up a product that is sold out.
I just called it product with no image and no stock and you can see here it's sold out.
If I go and put this back to how it was before and I hit Save on that,
you'll see we get the exact same result.
Unless is just a way to make your code more readable.
In this case, I think it makes more sense to use
if but they've decided to use unless here.
Saves them from having to write a comparison operator.
I guess that's why they did it.
The final line inside this loop is this link tag.
We're again creating a link with the same tag and filter as above here.
This is going to link to the product URL, the actual product.
We're going to include the image.
The real thing to look at here is line eight,
because we're constructing an image tag here with some attributes and some filters.
I'll hit "Save" and we'll quickly look at how that looks.
Now you'll see we've got the images included here like before.
Let's break it down. Let's first remove this filter here and see what happens.
Now we just loading up the product featured image source in this source tag.
Image is an object as well.
That's why we can chain another dot here to get the actual src of the image.
You can see here we're getting a different attribute of the image here,
the alt tag, but we'll get to that in just a sec.
If I save and I go back to the collection page.
Right now you'll see that all the links are broken.
If I inspect one of them,
you'll see we have a relative URL,
but it's not going to work in Shopify.
What we need to do pass that image through a filter.
The filter we had is image URL.
Here you can see a parameter of large,
but we can remove that parameter and just have the image URL tag with no parameter.
If we go back, refresh the page,
you'll see we get images showing up,
but they all show up at a 100 pixels wide.
That is the default behavior.
But we can actually change this to whatever you want.
Maybe we want it to be 200 by 200.
We can do something like this,
or if we want it to be the same width and height.
We don't actually need to put the value after x.
We can just hit "Save" on that.
Now we should see our image is being twice as big. There you go.
I think that's a quite good middle ground between
those really large images and the ones that come out by default, which is a 100.
Now this is really handy to have this as you can
put in a really big image into your Shopify dashboard,
but as long as you write code that limits the size of that image,
then that is how big the image will be loaded in the browser.
What I mean by that is if we actually go and click on open image in new tab.
Whether the original image we uploaded was a 1,000 pixels wide or 200 pixels wide.
It's only going get served from Shopify servers as a 200 pixel by 200 pixel image.
That's good for image optimization.
So rule of thumb here,
if you're including an image,
always use parameter here and specify
the max dimensions that you think that image needs to be.
Because there's no point serving an image that is way bigger than what you need it for.
This final tag is for the alt attribute of your image.
Should be familiar with alt attributes.
They describe the image for robots and people that can actually see the image.
Here you can see alt awesome sneakers If I remove the escape filter here,
you probably weren't noticed a difference.
Go back, refresh the page.
You'll see we still get the same result.
But what the escape filter does is if there is any HTML in this attribute,
it makes sure to escape it.
This is something that can catch you out at any point with Shopify theme programming and
Shopify theme development is HTML that is coming from an objects in Shopify,
being injected into your code and breaking everything.
Just a tip if you see anything really weird,
you're whole pages breaking and you didn't write any code for that to happen.
The code might actually be coming from a value that you're bringing through and liquid.
Good practice just to be safe, escape it.
Now I don't think there's going to be HTML in your alt tag typically.
But just a safe little option there.
You don't want any HTML coming through in this alt attribute.
Now, it's not style nicely.
We need to still styled with CSS.
But we've got the major points coming through.
We've got title, the price and the image,
and both the image and the title link to the actual product for us to go check it out.
Let's go back to the collection page.
Now we just need to introduce back the paginate object.
For that, because I don't know off the top my head how to do it
because it's already written for us most of the time in Shopify.
I'm going to access the docs end.
This is a good opportunity to follow
along as well because this is what you are going to be doing as well.
If I just type in Shopify liquid,
what I'm looking for is the liquid reference,
say right here. What are we looking for?
We're looking for the paginate tag.
I will go into tags.
I think it'd be closed as a theme tag, and it is.
You can click here, and there you go.
All you got to do is wrap these tags
around a for-loop and you get pagination. Pretty simple.
Pagination is a pain in the ass for a lot of other programming,
but Shopify makes it really easy for us.
We are on the collection template so we can just copy this example.
I can go back here.
I think five per page is an all right number for us.
We can code mri end tag as well here and paginate.
I'm going to hit save on that.
Go back into here,
refresh the page and you'll see that only five items show up per page.
Now, what it doesn't give us is the navigation to actually paginate.
Because we are missing one piece of code from the start of here.
To check that we can actually go and click on here and look at older versions.
Let's look at the original before we made any changes.
We can see here,
we've got this conditional.
I'm just going copy this and go back to our current.
At the end of the for-loop,
I'm going to paste that code that I took from the original code.
Now we can access the paginate object,
which is available within the paginate tag.
This is a helper object that Shopify gives us so that we can
actually check how many pages there are in this pagination.
You check the attribute code pages and we check to see if there's more than one page.
Now we can use the paginate object again with a easy to use filter,
which will transform the paginate object into a default pagination.
A lot of magic is going on behind the scenes here.
If you want to customize your pagination,
you can access the attributes on this paginate objects and manipulate them how you want.
But for our purposes,
we're just going to use the default pagination.
I refresh the page here after saving,
and now you can see we've got this default pagination.
Usually, what you would do,
because you probably wouldn't be using the default pagination in
a proper theme because you'd want to look nice and according to your style.
You'd usually create a pagination snippet and include it here.
In the next video, we'll be talking about sections and snippets.
Not long to learn about snippets,
but to finish off this lesson,
I need to talk to you about layouts.
We could have started with a layout,
but I wanted to start with the 18 line file rather than this one which is 43 lines.
For those of you who need a little recap on what a layout is,
this is what gets served as a wrapper on all your templates.
Unless you specify an alternative layout on a template,
this will be the wrapper that goes around every single template in your store.
Assuming we only have one layout here,
and it's using the default name theme.liquid,
this is going to be the wrapper that wraps around every template,
and the point which it wraps around is right here.
This special tag, content_for_layout is where your template gets loaded.
I want to show you that in practice right now.
We can see that this main tag comes in the layout file,
and then within that, we're loading the template.
Let's go to our collection template again,
and we'll see it starts with a h1.
If I look in here and inspect the code,
I already have the inspect open,
but you'll see we've got the h1 of the collections template,
and then we have main.
Everything above here is going to be the same apart
from the dynamic content that gets loaded in on every single page.
If I go to the blog page,
you'll see the head and the start of the body is the same,
and you've always got this main here,
then inside the main,
you have all the code of the template.
Going back to the collections page.
Content_for_layout,
that's where the template of the page you're currently looking at is loaded.
But of course, we've got all this other content around it.
Right here is a navigation.
Right here is a link to a cart.
If customer accounts enabled and a customer is logged in,
we will show a link to access their accounts.
If they're not logged in,
but accounts is enabled,
we'll give them a login link.
We're going to move that into its own section in the next video.
There's a very good reason for that,
but that makes up the whole body section of your layout.
Then you've got the head section,
which you only really need to worry about if you're going to be including extra assets.
You can see all the standard stuff that you would have in an HTML head.
The title, meta tags,
these objects for SEO.
The page title is whatever the title of the page is,
it's not the same as page.title because it's not
a Shopify page that the ones that you would customize here,
it's whatever page you're on,
the website, that's the page title.
Then page_description is your SEO description,
you add your SEO data here and then you have this special tag called content_for_header.
As it says here,
this is simply a header hook for plugins.
This is a point that plugins and I
believe code that you put or preferences that you put here.
If I go into preferences,
basically anything you want added to your head dynamically,
it'll get inserted where that tag is.
I believe some of this,
if you add it in a Pixel or a Google Analytics,
and the place where it would insert it in the head is right here,
but you don't have to edit that at all.
In fact, I think the editor will error,
if you try and change that,
that is what content_for_header is.
Don't need to change it,
just leave it where it is.
Then right here is when we bring in our assets.
We've got some filters here,
and I'll just show you what these do quickly.
We've got this application.scss.css and if we just output that on the layout by itself,
number one it'll break any styles we created which we didn't,
but you'll see here, it just literally outputs that text to the screen.
If you create an output tag and just literally put a string in there,
you're basically doing nothing.
You could remove this from either side and it'll be the same result.
But what we're doing here is we're taking that and we're filtering it,
we're finding the full asset URL of that asset.
Let's just do that first.
Refresh the page and now you can see this becomes
a full URL generated by Shopify server that will link you to the asset.
Then finally, with the last filter on there,
it transforms that URL into a fully constructed stylesheet tag.
If I hit save, refresh the page,
you'll see that the URL doesn't show up now because it's encapsulated in a HTML tag.
If I look down here,
there's a lot of generated tags in there.
You can see that one now bringing it into
our project for a link tag and not just outputting it on the screen.
We can actually just copy that HTML word for word,
put it in here like this.
Then if we remove that,
which generates the stylesheet tag and just replace the href with that value,
we should get the same result.
Now we should see it showing up twice, actually.
Of course, because I took the stylesheet tag off this one.
This one is just showing the asset URL
and this one is the fully formed link to the asset.
What I just did that with this line is essentially
the same thing as if I used the stylesheet tag filter there.
Not important for you to understand in terms
of editing this because you probably don't want to touch this,
but it's important to know how it works you're not confused when say, for instance,
you want to include another stylesheet tag,
you would just have to duplicate this, put it under,
and then maybe your next file is just called styles.css.
That is how you would include a new asset that you included here
in your Shopify theme everywhere that this layout is included.
But in terms of transforming that into
a fully fledged asset URL and then creating a tag out of it,
you don't really need to mess with.
The same is happening here with JavaScript,
where taking the filename,
creating a fully fledged asset URL from Shopify
and then transforming that into a script tag.
I'm going to save that.
This is more of a theme structuring thing.
But just to demonstrate,
I am going to show you how to do an alternate template.
Here we can create,
I'm just going to call it alternate.
You can call it whatever you want.
Let's just remove all of this navigation content and hit save.
Now we've got this alternative layout that we can use.
How we would actually make that layout apply to a certain template is
we can go to the start line of any template and use the layout tag.
Instead of theme.liquid, now it's going to be theme alternate
and if I put that tag at the start of our template,
refresh the page, you'll now see there's no navigation.
All right. If I remove it and hit save,
now you'll see that we have the same theme as before.
Most of the time,
it's not important to have a second layout,
but it is there as an option.
I'm just going to delete that one because we don't want to have to make changes
to multiple theme layouts for this project and for this class,
we only really need one layout file,
but the option is there to create different layouts.
Maybe you want a page with less content on it.
Maybe we don't want the header or footer, for example.
We can remove that from an alternative layout and then use that layout on the template.
Hopefully, that has made it really clear what's going on in
a basic template like here for collection and your layout file.
What I want to leave you with before we go into sections and snippets,
is this part of my documentation,
which is template-specific objects.
Talked a bit about it in the previous video.
But I just want to make sure you fully understand this.
We start with the layout file and then the template for the page where currently
looking at gets loaded inside this container
here because we've put this content_for_layout tag here.
Now we have access to the particular objects that goes with that template.
What I want you to understand here is when we're on the collection template,
we don't have access to a product
because we don't have any concept of what product we're looking for.
Unless we loop through a collection and access its products,
then we can affect a particular product from within a loop.
Same can be said for if we're in a blog.
When we're in a blog template,
we're looking at a specific blog.
We can use the blog object,
but we can't actually access a article unless we loop through the articles in that blog.
The same thing with collections and products.
But then when we go into the product or the article page,
we've already seen the product page or product template.
Let's look at the article template.
We can access the article object specifically
because this is the template that gets loaded when an article is being viewed.
I just wanted to make that super clear.
If it still doesn't make sense,
give me a comment in the discussion box below,
but that is template scope and templates-specific objects.
That's why templates are really important.
But at the same time,
you might not want to include a lot of code in your template.
You might want to link directly to a section and there's a very good reason for that,
which we'll go into in the next video.